Welcome to the June 2021 program of JW Broadcasting.
The 149th Class of Gilead graduated on January 16, 2021.
The students were able to take full advantage of the school,
despite the pandemic, and the extra efforts to remain safe.
How would they use their training in this time of the end?
How did they personally benefit from the school?
Let's find out in part one of this historic graduation program.
This has indeed been a unique class of Gilead at a most unique time in world events.
The Bethel family is fully aware of what transpired.
But since this program will be broadcast to our global brotherhood,
let me remind all of you of what transpired.
You're well aware of the unique time in world events, a global pandemic.
But what makes this class so unique?
A normal class of Gilead consists of 50 some students.
The 149th class is made up of just 25.
Your class is abnormal.
But why?
You know why.
But let me share your experience with the worldwide brotherhood.
Those who had been invited to attend this class of Gilead had begun to arrive
at the Educational Center in Patterns of New York.
The 25 students in this class actually arrived in mid-March of 2020.
And as we all know, it was at that time that the coronavirus
was declared to be a global pandemic.
Most travel was shut down.
The rest of their classmates could not come.
Due to government restrictions on educational facilities, the 149th class had to be postponed.
You students were stuck at Patterns in New York with no classes in session.
Commendably, many of you were able to work remotely
for your home branch office in the interim.
Finally, here in New York,
government agencies allowed for educational facilities to again conduct classes
if physical distancing could be maintained.
With just 25 of you, that was possible in the Gilead lecture hall.
So we have only 25 abnormal students who will graduate today to clarify.
It is the number of students that makes this class abnormal.
But I'm told by your instructors that individually, you are very normal.
In fact, they are very impressed with your spirituality and your Christian personalities.
You have excelled in your studies and classroom participation.
It's a delight to be with you on this very special day.
What else though makes this an abnormal Gilead graduation?
You were not able to invite family members and close friends to be here in person with you
for this exciting event.
However, the teaching committee made arrangements for you to tie in a number of these ones
for a stream recording of the program.
And the good news is that the entire program is being recorded
and will be posted as a future JW Broadcasting Monthly program in all of the approved languages.
We have a few statistics to share about the 149th class.
Of the 25 students, eight or married couples, seven are single brothers,
and there are two single sisters in the class.
I guess they're still single.
All we're serving at a Bethel Branch Facility are at a regional translation office
before attending school.
The students are from 14 different countries and speak 29 different languages.
Their average age is 41. That's a good age.
44 years ago, I was 41.
Their average age and full-time service is 20.
In the Bible, Gilead referred to a territory in Israel,
and that name, Gilead, was derived from a Hebrew word that meant witness heap.
When the school was first inaugurated in 1943, Gilead was an appropriate name.
One of the instructors described the purpose of the school saying,
it was to instill in the students a more intense desire to share in the evangelizing work.
And for decades, thousands of missionaries were sent out to open up new territories around the world.
A heap of witness was given during that period of time.
However, in 2011, the governing body adjusted this specific purpose of Gilead.
Instead of focusing on opening up new territories for preaching,
the purpose of the curriculum changed.
As we mentioned previously, this entire class was already serving at a Bethel facility
or a regional translation office.
The goal of Gilead is now to bolster such ones so as to strengthen and stabilize God's people in the respective territories to which they will be assigned.
Then what about the all-important evangelizing work?
Who is assisting with the heap of witness worldwide?
That's now the focus of the school for kingdom evangelizers.
Each branch committee selects qualified pioneers who are willing to be transferred to another part of the country that needs help with the preaching work.
By using the large pool of zealous local pioneers, the heap of witness is still being given.
Where the need is great.
These local ones are already adapted to the culture, climate, and living conditions in their countries.
And oftentimes they already know the language where there is the greatest need.
However, the 25 of you in this class of Gilead are expected to strengthen and stabilize God's people where you are assigned.
Well, what does that entail?
For you brothers, in time it may mean you will be given more responsibility.
But your training has given you another way to stabilize fellow believers in your assignment.
And this applies to all 25 of you whether brothers or sisters.
You've been elevated while here at the Gilead.
In fact, in the territory of Gilead in the Bible, the elevation changes dramatically.
In the Jordan Valley, Gilead was 690 feet, 210 meters, being low sea level.
But traveling east to the dome-like mountainous region of Gilead, the elevation rises to over 3,300 feet or 1,000 meters.
You students came to Gilead, be low sea level.
But with daily Bible study and lectures, you have been elevated.
Throughout the past five months, your faith has grown.
Your spirituality has been enhanced.
Your Christian personality has been refined.
You have been elevated.
You will be going out to your assignment, not so much for a heap of witness, but as a heap of example.
This way, you will strengthen and stabilize those you work with at the branch and those you associate with in your congregations.
Find a Deuteronomy 8-17-18.
Never forget that your power and strength, your spiritual wealth, does not originate with you.
It is Jehovah who has made this transformation in you.
Read with me Deuteronomy 8-17-18.
If you should say in your heart, my own power and the strength of my own hand have produced this wealth for me.
Remember that it is Jehovah your God who gives power to you to make well.
In order to carry out his covenant, that he swore to your forefathers as it is today.
Today, you will graduate from the 149th class of Gilead.
But you will strengthen and stabilize those in your assignment if you remember that it is Jehovah your God who gives power to you.
For decades, we have been reminded to read God's Word daily.
It was even painted on the side of the factory building in Brooklyn for decades.
David Splein is going to take that a step farther with his theme.
Enjoy your Bible reading.
The Bible is a wonderful book.
It's a book that we should just enjoy reading.
So for this talk, I thought I'd give a couple of suggestions for adding to our reading pleasure.
Here's the first.
Don't pass quickly over the details.
Stop and investigate.
And at times, you'll be very glad you did.
Now let's take an example.
You're reading in the book of First Chronicles.
Now there are a lot of names in First Chronicles, and you come across the name Himan.
If you were just interested in covering material, you'd probably pass over it and go on to the next verse.
But you're not in a rush.
And you notice a cross reference beside the name.
It refers to you to First Chronicles 633.
So you decide to investigate.
And in doing so, you'll learn something heartwarming about Jehovah.
Let's do that.
First Chronicles chapter 6.
I'll give you a moment.
And verse 33.
It says,
These are the men who served with their sons.
Of the co-haffites,
Himan, the singer,
Son of Jewel,
Son of Samuel.
So this Himan
was Samuel's grandson.
Now what do we know about his family situation?
Well, his father, Joel and his uncle, Abija, were judges.
But they had a terrible reputation.
They'd rule in your favor if you could pay enough.
But if you were poor, forget it.
And the whole country knew about it.
At one point, the Bible says that all the elders of Israel came to Samuel and said,
They didn't want Joel and Abija as judges anymore.
They wanted a king.
Jehovah was furious.
And he couldn't have been too happy with Joel and Abija either.
Now can you imagine the effect that this corruption had on the reputation of Himan's family?
The shame?
But like Hezekiah,
Himan didn't allow his father's, by example, to paralyze him.
Himan developed his own personal relationship with Jehovah.
How do we know?
We followed a few clues.
We followed a few cross-references.
And we came to First Chronicles chapter 25 and verse 5.
Let's do that.
First Chronicles chapter 25 and verse 5.
And again, we're trying to find something more about Himan.
It says all of these were sons of Himan,
a visionary of the king and matters pertaining to the true God to his glory.
Thus the true God gave Himan 14 sons and three daughters.
Did you see it?
A visionary of the king.
What was a visionary?
It was a kind of prophet.
Now let's see.
Samuel was a prophet.
And now, Himan was a prophet.
Do you see what's heartwarming?
Jehovah was dealing with Himan in much the same way he had dealt with his grandfather.
Jehovah does not hold the sins of the fathers against the sons.
That is something very, very nice to remember.
And can you see where this example would help some people you know?
Some, even in full-time service, have a hard time with it,
because they had a rough family background,
and they may feel that they're worthless.
Mary is a case in point.
I'm going to call her Mary.
Now, Mary's father was so violent that at times Mary, her mom and her siblings,
had to get up in the middle of the night and run for their lives.
And to the neighbors, they were that family.
To make it worse, they were poor.
So all this made Mary feel worthless.
Until?
Until the day when she started studying with the witnesses.
She developed her own relationship with Jehovah, and she accepted Him as her father.
And today, Mary's a pioneer.
How does she feel about her life?
Here's what she wrote.
Jehovah is constantly looking for those who want a friendship with Him.
And here's a touching point.
He's even looking into the hearts of children.
Isn't that nice?
Now, there are two lessons here.
As humans' example shows, our family background doesn't define who we are.
Jehovah will deal with us as individuals.
And a second example, one for the elders.
Me like Jehovah, treat each member of the family as an individual.
Don't lump them all in together.
Not our second point.
We can make our Bible reading more enjoyable if we try to fill in the blanks.
And that's something that our Bible dramas do.
They fill in the blanks for us.
Now, let's illustrate.
Let's consider the example of Queen Esther and the King's Son.
Now, you remember the story.
King of Hazueras, who was understood to be Xerxes I,
was displeased with Queen Vashtai, and he decided he was going to replace her.
So a call went out, enter the whole Persian Empire for the most beautiful women
to be brought to the palace.
And Esther was among them.
Now, the women were placed under the care of a man named Haggai,
and his job was to get them ready to meet the king.
Well, when we read Esther chapter 2 and verse 9, we smell trouble.
Let's read it.
And you see if you can figure out what trouble is looming here.
Esther chapter 2 and verse 9.
Remember, we're trying to fill in the blanks, we'll try to imagine.
Now, the young woman, Esther, was pleasing to him, Haggai,
and won his favor.
Now, this is a competition.
Keep that in mind.
This is a competition.
So he promptly arranged for her beauty treatments and her diet.
Wait a minute.
That's another detail we'll have to pursue sometime.
Esther was Jewish.
She was trying to hide the fact that she was Jewish.
And there were so many things that Jews couldn't eat.
How did she handle that?
And that's for another day.
That's Karyon.
And talking about Haggai, it says he assigned it to her
seven selected young women from the king's house.
He also transferred her and her young attendants
to the best place in the house of the women.
Do you smell trouble?
You see the problem?
Preferential treatment.
This is a competition.
Probably there's a lot of jealousy going on among the candidates.
And now Haggai is doing everything in his power to help Esther
to win the king's heart.
How do you suppose that went down?
It could have led to big trouble.
And here's another factor.
What about the king's wives?
Now, there was only one queen.
But a haziurus had many wives.
Some say he had 330 wives.
Now, when Vashtai was deposed,
who do you suppose expected to become the queen?
The number two wife.
And yet, instead of going into the harem and choosing someone,
they went outside the palace even to women who didn't have a royal blood.
How do you suppose that went down?
And I'll think about this.
Some scholars believe that although Vashtai was deposed as queen,
she didn't leave the palace.
That she just couldn't ever see the king again.
If she was still there as some scholars believe,
was she plotting in the background?
This could have been a very difficult situation.
But Esther 2 verse 15 tells us something very interesting about Esther.
We're going to read just the end of verse 15.
Esther 2 at the end of verse 15.
It says, all the while,
Esther was winning the favor of everyone who saw her.
Esther avoided the landmines.
What does that tell us?
She was not only a very beautiful woman,
she had a beautiful, godly personality,
a winning personality.
Well, we said this was about Esther and the king's son.
Who is the king's son? The heir.
Well, we met him at the convention this past summer.
He was the man who was so nice to Nehemiah.
Artazerxes.
And if the historians have their facts straight,
Artazerxes would have been only three years old
when Esther married his father.
Now, history tells us that as kings of Persia go,
Artazerxes had a very nice personality.
He was mild, peaceful, kind,
so unlike his father, who had a terrible temper.
We have to ask,
did Esther have anything to do with the pleasant disposition
of Artazerxes?
Maybe she did. Who knows?
We're using our imagination.
We're trying to fill in the blanks.
Well, we haven't discussed anything earth-shaking here,
and that isn't the point of this talk.
But if you investigate the details and fill in the blanks,
it'll contribute to the pleasure you derive from reading the Bible.
And if Bible reading is a pleasant experience for you,
you'll have no trouble to arrange a schedule
of daily Bible reader.
Enjoy.
Thank you, brothers Blaine.
We enjoyed your presentation,
and we look forward to enjoying our Bible reading even more.
Next on our program,
we will hear from Brother Seth Hyatt,
a helper to the service committee.
He has the catchy theme for us.
What do you want me to do for you?
Brother Hyatt, please.
I know you agree.
Your Gilead training has been a gift,
a gift from Jehovah, Jesus Christ,
and the faithful and discreet slave.
Have you thought about how you're going to share your gift
and allow others to benefit from your training
when you return to your assignment?
It's a good question.
When we get back to the busyness of a routine,
perhaps the stress and anxieties of increased responsibility,
sharing a gift may be the last thing on your mind.
So it's good to think about it now.
What will help you to strengthen, encourage, motivate,
and instruct those who you oversee, your workmates,
your brothers and sisters in the congregation?
We can learn much from the way Jesus dealt with people.
Like you, Jesus was entrusted with a beautiful gift.
Unlike you and me, Jesus had some amazing abilities.
For example, he could read hearts.
The scriptures describe an occasion
when Jesus responded to a man's thoughts rather than to his words.
Do you think Jesus' ability to know what his audience was thinking
and feeling enhanced his effectiveness as he shared his gift?
Of course.
But interestingly, the scriptures reveal
that Jesus dignified people in the way he communicated with them.
He often asked meaningful questions
and listened attentively to the answers
before he shared his gift.
For a few minutes this morning,
let's consider two occasions when Jesus did just that.
In doing so, we'll get some pointers
that will assist you to be effective
in sharing your gift of Gilead training.
The first account is found in the Bible book of Mark, chapter 10.
Let's turn there to gather.
Mark, chapter 10, beginning in verse 35.
James and John, the sons of Zebedee,
approached him and said to him,
teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you.
He said to them,
what do you want me to do for you?
They replied,
grant us to sit down one at your right hand
and one at your left in your glory.
The parallel account in Matthew
reveals that James and John did not approach Jesus
on their own.
They had their mother do it for them.
Do you think as this woman approached Jesus,
he knew what she wanted?
Probably.
How did he deal with her?
Did he interrupt her?
Reprimand her?
No.
Instead he asked a question.
What do you want me to do for you?
The second account is just a few verses down.
Mark, chapter 10, beginning in verse 46.
Here we learn about a blind beggar named Bartimaeus.
He sat by the road,
and when he heard that Jesus was passing by, he called out.
Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me.
The crowd tried to quiet him,
but Bartimaeus called out even more loudly.
Jesus stopped and said,
bring him to me.
Now Bartimaeus had an audience with the Son of God.
How did Jesus address Bartimaeus?
In verse 51,
Jesus said to him,
what do you want me to do for you?
The blind man said to him,
rebony,
let me recover my sight.
And Jesus said to him,
go, your faith has made you well.
And immediately he recovered his sight
and he began to follow Jesus on the road.
What do you want me to do for you?
The same question in both accounts, very different situations.
Why do you think Jesus asked this question?
Well, he accomplished at least four things.
What were they?
Well, first of all,
he dignified his audience
by encouraging communication.
Number two,
he allowed his audience to reveal what was in his or her heart,
to put it on the table as it were.
In his dealings with James and John,
the question actually protected Jesus
and gave him an opportunity to give those two apostles
a valuable lesson in modesty.
This matter of giving the right and left places in the kingdom
is not mine to give.
Finally, in the case of Bartimaeus,
would you agree the question provided opportunity
to strengthen Bartimaeus' faith
and to give him effective assistance?
Allowing Bartimaeus to articulate his desire,
what do you want?
And then to experience the immediate realization
would have left no doubt in Bartimaeus' mind
that he had been considered.
And how did it affect him?
Well, the account says he began to follow Jesus on the road.
It's a beautiful example of asking a question
that helps you to share your gift.
When I was a newly appointed circuit overseer,
the elders in a congregation that I was serving
expressed concern about a sister who was missing meetings.
They asked me if I would be willing to make a shepherding visit.
Of course, I was happy to do that.
The arrangements were made,
another elder accompanied me,
and I shared all of the appropriate verses
about meeting attendants.
The sister listened,
and as we were leaving,
she looked me in the eye,
and she said,
you don't have a clue.
At the time, I thought she was being disrespectful.
But as I thought about it,
I came to wish that instead of showing up
with all the appropriate verses,
I had showed up with all of the appropriate questions.
What do you want me to do for you?
How may I help?
What's been happening in your life?
Those kinds of questions allow you
to render meaningful assistance.
I learned from that experience.
I hope you can learn from my mistake.
Don't make the mistake of thinking you know
what a person wants or needs.
Jesus did know,
and he still asked questions.
Didn't I find the audience?
Allow your listener to reveal what is in his or her heart.
It may protect you,
and it allows you to render meaningful assistance.
Approach your assignment the way Jesus approached his.
What do you want me to do for you?
If you do,
not only will you effectively share your gift,
you will be a gift wherever you serve.
Thank you, Brother Hyatt.
For opening our eyes to Jesus' question,
what do you want me to do for you?
You will now enjoy Brother Alex Rhyme,
a helper to the publishing committee
of the inspiring subject,
let Jehovah inspire you.
Have you ever had an important decision,
suddenly thrust on you?
You thought you knew the right thing to do,
but as soon as you decide,
you start having second thoughts,
maybe even regrets.
And now you can't stop thinking,
did I do the right thing?
This tendency to repeat a thought over and over again
is called rumination.
And when those thoughts make us feel anxious,
it can be bad for our health.
Some of you students made tough decisions
before you came to this class.
Thank you for that.
And everyone right now is faced with challenging decisions
every day.
So what can we do to stop anxious rumination once it starts?
Well, open your Bibles with me to Psalm 37 verse 5,
and notice the advice that is given to us here.
Commit your way to Jehovah,
rely on him,
and he will act in your behalf.
Now the word for commit here literally means
to roll or remove something from our life.
So as the footnote says,
we need to roll our way,
our concerns, our anxieties upon Jehovah.
When we ruminate anxiously,
we're holding on to our problem.
But the Bible says through prayer,
we have to take the problem off our shoulders
and put it on Jehovah's.
In other words, we no longer act as if the burden is ours.
We need to leave it in his hands.
It sounds so simple,
but at times it's hard to do.
So what can help us when we have trouble letting go?
Well, our suggestion today
is to let Jehovah inspire you with awe.
Now to inspire someone
means to make them feel that they want to do something
and can do it.
And it may be that Jehovah gave us the emotion of awe
for that very purpose.
You may be wondering now,
how can awe help me?
Well, open your Bibles again.
This time to Genesis chapter 28.
And let's look at an example together
that illustrates how this can work.
In verse 10,
we catch up with the patriarch Jacob.
He's on the road.
Notice,
Jacob departed from Beersheba
and kept going toward Herod.
Why was he going there?
Well, the main reason was to get away from his brother Issa.
Why?
Because Jacob had just made a tough decision
and Issa was mad.
You know the story.
For most of his life,
Issa despised the family birthright.
And that upset Jacob very much.
So at some point,
he purchased the birthright from him.
Years go by.
And then one day,
their father Isaac is getting ready to bless Issa
as the firstborn.
Can you picture the scene?
What was Jacob going to do?
It's not possible today to know all the factors
that influenced Isaac, Rebecca, and Jacob back then.
But the fact is,
Jacob's decision put a strain on the whole family.
Issa began plotting to kill his brother.
And that's why Jacob was on the road.
Do you think he might have been
ruminating a bit that day on what happened?
Did he perhaps have second thoughts?
Was he asking himself,
did I do the right thing?
Was it okay to fool my father?
What does Jehovah think of me now?
Those would have been reasonable questions.
Of course, we don't know what Jacob was thinking.
But if he was having second thoughts,
what happened next
must have helped him to stop ruminating on them.
Notice what we read in verses 11 and 12.
In time,
he came to a place
and prepared to spend the night there
because the sun had set.
So he took one of the stones of that place
and set it to rest his head on
and lay down there.
Then he had a dream.
And look,
there was a stairway set on the earth
and its top reached up to the heavens.
And there were God's angels ascending
and descending on it.
Now, this heavenly ladder
may have looked like a rising flight of stones,
like the one you see here in this illustration.
Jacob could see now that he was not alone.
He was a small part
of an awesome organization.
And there's communication
between the different parts of that organization.
Angels,
ministers in some important way
between Jehovah
and humans who have his approval.
And there was more.
Let's continue in verse 13.
And look,
there was Jehovah stationed above it.
And he said,
I am Jehovah,
the God of Abraham,
your father,
and the God of Isaac.
The land on which you are lying,
to you,
I am going to give it
and to your offspring.
How comforting those words
must have been to Jacob.
Jehovah wasn't displeased with him,
quite the contrary.
He promised to bless Jacob
in a marvelous way.
Jehovah apparently used this awesome experience
to help Jacob to let go
of any anxiety he might have had.
As long as he continued to do his best,
Jacob could trust Jehovah
to do the rest.
What a relief.
Notice his reaction in verse 17.
And he grew fearful
and added,
how awe-inspiring this place is.
This can only be the house of God.
And this is the gate of the heavens.
Jacob's relief here is almost palpable.
He's no longer conflicted.
The vision inspires him
to make a vow of loyalty to Jehovah forever.
You can read what he did and said
in the latter part of this chapter.
Now, verse 17 uses the same Hebrew word twice.
The first time, it's translated as fearful.
The second time, as awe-inspiring.
And that may be because awe is a surprising emotion.
It's a wonderful mix of inspiration and fear.
You sense you're in the presence of someone
or something greater than yourself,
but it makes you feel small in a good way.
Aw can humble you.
And that shifts your thinking.
It helps you to see things as they are
and not as you expect them to be.
It's the kind of fear proverbs 1 and 7 says,
is the beginning of knowledge or wisdom.
And that may be why at times,
Jehovah evokes awe in us.
Like Jacob,
people often say they feel more centered
and spiritual after an awesome experience.
Aw seems to pull us out of ourselves.
It connects us on a deeper level with Jehovah.
And it reconnects us with what is most important.
Jehovah's sovereignty, his creation, and his people.
Now, getting away from Issa did not end Jacob's problems.
There were other times in his life
he again became very anxious and afraid.
But true to his word,
Jehovah was always there.
As long as Jacob was faithful,
Jehovah made sure he would succeed.
20 years later when Jacob returned to Canaan with his family,
Jehovah sent out a company of angels to greet him.
How awesome was that?
Well, what does all of this mean then for you and me?
Psalm 89 7 says,
Jehovah is awe-inspiring to all those around him.
If you've ever hiked in the Banff National Park
or walked in the mure woods
or felt goose bumps as you looked up into the night sky,
you know what awe feels like.
You've experienced Jehovah inspiring you.
So the next time you need to get out of your head,
remember awe.
Take a walk in the woods,
sing your favorite kingdom song.
awe may be the most underutilized way we know
to help us to stop ruminating on anxious thoughts
and fully commit our way to Jehovah.
Don't let your problems stress you out.
Do your research, pray for guidance,
make the best decision you can,
and then let Jehovah inspire you with awe.
We enjoyed that presentation, Alex.
Now we have one of the Gilead instructors
of Trent Leopold with the somewhat cryptic theme,
Mark Your Maribal.
Brother Leopold, what do you mean with that?
He did not miss the sign the first time,
but the second time it meant his life.
He was Moses.
Our lives are full of signposts,
figurative markers for lessons, memories, experiences.
Some good, some bad, some signposts we erect,
others are put up for us.
In either case, they should help us to continue
in life successfully.
For instance, consider a lesson a signpost
in the life of Moses.
It happened shortly after the crossing of the Red Sea,
and it's recorded in Exodus chapter 17,
at a place called Refidem, the Ezralites gather,
and there was Moses by a crag with his staff,
with a quarreling nation.
The events there at Refidem provided a significant lesson
for Moses, something to remember for future circumstances,
and so he marked that spa.
How did he do it?
He changed the name from Refidem,
which meant refresh to Maribah, which meant quarreling.
Little did Moses know that that name would ring in his ears.
39 years later, at a place called Kadesh,
Moses was again near a crag with his staff,
with a quarreling nation before him.
And based on the events that happened there,
look at what is recorded in Numbers chapter 20, verses 12 and 13.
Numbers chapter 20, verses 12 and 13,
we read.
Jehovah later said to Moses and Aaron,
because you did not show faith in me and sanctify me before the eyes
of the people of Israel,
you will not bring this congregation into the land that I will give them.
These are the waters of Maribah,
with the Israelites quarreled with Jehovah,
so that he was sanctified among them.
Moses is taught a lesson here.
It's unclear who exactly named the place Maribah,
but Moses did record it,
that these were the waters of Maribah,
an unforgettable signpost in Moses' life.
What it meant to Moses was very clear.
So what now?
What would Moses do following this?
Well, from verse 14, if we were to read,
we would see that Moses carried on with his assignment.
He continued to lead the Israelites.
He led them against the kings of Sihon and Og.
He began to see Jehovah's mighty arm of power as they draw closer
and closer to the promised land.
And in his enthusiasm,
Moses makes one request of Jehovah.
He turns to him,
and we can read his words in Deuteronomy chapter 3,
verses 25 and 26.
Moses' words in verse 25, he writes,
Please, let me pass over and see the good land
that is across the Jordan,
this good mountainous region, and Lebanon.
But Jehovah was still furious with me because of you,
and he would not listen to me.
Rather, Jehovah said to me,
Enough from you.
Never speak to me again about this matter.
Jehovah was still furious with me because of you.
Maraba.
That's what Moses is referring to.
The signpost was clear from Moses.
How would Moses respond to this?
What would he do?
Well, Moses carried on.
He got back to work.
Back to business.
He wasn't finished.
He continued to lead and shepherd the nation.
He prepared Joshua to be his successor.
And he worked along until Jehovah
came to Moses and said to him,
Moses is time to go to the mountain.
In other words, it was time for Moses' death.
Read, please, Jehovah's words to Moses in Deuteronomy chapter 32,
verses 51 and 52.
Beginning in verse 51 of Deuteronomy 32,
we read Jehovah's words.
Because both of you, that is, Moses and Aaron,
were unfaithful to me among the Israelites
at the waters of Maraba of Kadesh in the wilderness of Zinn,
because you did not sanctify me before the people of Israel.
You will see the land from a distance,
but you will not enter the land that I am giving to the people of Israel.
Jehovah draws Moses' attention back to Maraba.
What effect did this have on Moses,
that Jehovah referred to Maraba again?
Well, think of this.
After Jehovah's refusal to reconsider his judgment on Moses,
Moses continued fully dedicated to his assignment.
In fact, the details make up the book of Deuteronomy.
If you look at what happened shortly before Jehovah's words here in chapter 32,
we find Moses recited a beautiful song of praise to Jehovah.
Following Jehovah's words in chapter 33,
we find Moses here giving a blessing for the nation of Israel.
Do you see what happened to Moses?
Moses marked the lessons and experiences in his life,
like Maraba.
He was not paralyzed or broken by disappointment.
Rather, his resolve to serve Jehovah faithfully was strengthened.
What helped Moses?
How did he do it?
Consider at least two things that may have helped Moses.
Number one, Moses' intimate friendship with Jehovah.
For example, why would Moses even ask Jehovah
to reconsider his judgment on him?
Because Moses knew Jehovah intimately.
He knew him to be a God merciful and compassionate and abundant in loving kindness.
And when Jehovah refused to reconsider,
Moses did not say a word.
Why?
Because Moses knew that Jehovah was also a God perfect in his activity
and that all his ways are justice.
You see, for Moses' example, we see the more intimate our friendship is with Jehovah,
the more intimately he can teach us and train us.
And thus, like Moses, it will be easier to get past disappointment
and continue in our assignment faithful and joyful.
Consider a second thing that may have helped Moses.
And that was Job.
Remember, Moses wrote the book of Job
around 1473 around the same time as the events that took place at Maraba of Kadesh.
The words are fresh in his mind.
Moses knew how Jehovah dealt with Job.
For example, at Job 38, verse 3, Jehovah said to Job,
brace yourself, please, like a man, and I will question you.
Moses knew how Job responded to his problems and to Jehovah's correction.
For example, at Job 40, verse 4, Job said to Jehovah,
I put my hand over my mouth.
And Moses also knew the final outcome of the matters with Job.
Therefore, Moses was able to see his own difficulties and his own disappointments
through the prism of universal sovereignty.
And that gave Moses perspective.
So, take advantage of the inspired words of God at your disposal.
Meditate deeply on the experiences of Jehovah's faithful servants like Job and like Moses.
These examples will give you perspective and allow you to move on joyfully.
Brothers and sisters, the simple truth is, in our life of service to God,
we may be treated unfairly.
We will likely be disappointed at times.
Our expectations may not be met, and we will respond poorly at times.
Mark the moment as a lesson in life, a meribah.
And if, as was the case with Moses, Jehovah marks it for you, be grateful.
Do not be paralyzed or broken by disappointment.
Like Moses, fix in mind what you have to do.
Allow the experience or the lesson to strengthen your resolve,
to serve Jehovah faithfully and joyfully.
You can, if you mark your meribah.
And now we know what you meant by the theme Mark, your meribah.
And speaking of Mark, we will now listen to Mark Numer,
another Gilead instructor with the theme from Strength to Strength.
It's all yours, brother Numer.
Today, it's a privilege to address you a very precious group of people.
Your journey to this day has not been an easy one.
But in this talk, we want to focus on a specific journey.
The one that began when you were invited to Gilead,
up to your first day in class.
Due to the lockdown, that journey brought you unexpected trials,
unknown to previous classes of Gilead.
Along the way, you said many prayers and even shed some tears.
But instead of giving into despair, we're so proud of you, you became stronger.
Your journey can be compared to the journey of a Levite,
as described in Psalm 84.
So let's open our Bibles to Psalm 84.
And we're going to review the man's musings,
as he traveled from his home to Jehovah's Temple, Psalm 84.
And as we do, we will learn what it means to find strength in Jehovah.
And what will help you to continue to go from strength to strength.
So we can begin at verse 5.
Happy are the men who find their strengths in you.
Now, what does this mean?
To find strengths means you have to be looking for it.
So we look to Jehovah for strength.
How do we do that?
We do that by prayer and focus.
When we pray, we pray that Jehovah for his Holy Spirit
and focus on him, he gives us strength.
Now, at first, this strength may be just enough to start a difficult journey,
such as you started when you received your invitation to Gilead.
But as the journey continues, you become stronger.
If you take the right approach, well, what is that approach?
Well, let's read on, and we'll go to verse 6.
When they pass through the Baker Valley,
they make it into a place of springs
and the early rain closes it with blessings.
There were many routes to travel to get to Jerusalem.
But this Levite speaks of traveling through the Baker Valley.
That's not the scenic route.
The Baker Valley was a dry, desolate, parched area.
In fact, the word Baker comes from a Hebrew word to weep.
It seems that the Baker plant exuded a type of milky sap,
giving the appearance of tears which added to the gloominess of this parched land.
There may also have been literal tears,
a shed as ones made their long journey to Jerusalem.
But notice, notice what this Levite was able to do
as he walked through this valley.
There he says in verse 6,
they make it into a place of springs
and the early rain closes it with blessings.
You see, this Levite was so focused on the joy
he would have worshipping at the temple
that as he walked through the dry, desolate, Baker Valley,
this scenery along the way looked attractive to him.
He was able to look at this dried up valley with eyes of faith
and make it into a place of water springs.
Now, how was that possible?
Well, it's like when a brother once described his trip
to the house of a sister he was courting.
It involved getting on, dirty buses, crowded subways, walking past,
dingy apartments, but to him,
the whole trip was a beautiful scene
because it was taking him to visit her.
Similarly, the Levite of Psalm 84
could see past the gloominess around him
and see Jehovah's blessings ahead.
He was energized by thinking about his privilege
of actually serving at Jehovah's Temple.
To the point where even the Baker Valley was beautiful to him
because it led to the place he most wanted to be.
And with that in focus, notice what happens.
Let's read verse seven.
They will walk on from strength to strength.
Each one appears before God in Zion.
Now what does that mean, strength to strength?
Though the Levite may have entered the Valley of Tears
weak under the weight of his problems,
love for true worship fueled every step taken.
He knew his service would be noticed by Jehovah
who would bless his whole soul's effort to serve him.
That was the initial strength from Jehovah he had.
But when he finally arrived at the temple,
the joy of actually appearing before Jehovah God,
that joy and having his approval and blessing empowered him,
it energized him to walk from strength that Jehovah
initially gives to even greater strength.
In other words, it made him an even stronger person
than he was before beginning the journey.
Now for you students, your journey to Gilead
was different from others.
You did not take the scenic route.
But in Jehovah's strengths,
you were able to look beyond the four walls of quarantine,
beyond the lockdown, beyond the start of class being postponed.
You looked beyond the dry, parched ground of the Baker Valley
and you saw Jehovah's blessing on his people
as the governing body gave faithful
and discrete direction to the worldwide brotherhood.
You were right here, you watched it personally.
So though you may have arrived here,
weakened by your personal trials,
after walking through your figurative bake a valley
in Jehovah's strength, you came out stronger,
to appear before Jehovah God,
to be trained by his organization.
And then it was finally announced
the school would start in August.
And I remember, I remember the day
when you walked into the classroom for the first time
and you sat in your seats
and you opened up your student binder,
you put your Bible on the desk
and as you looked up, your eyes revealed,
I made it to my journey and class began.
Day after day and it is noteworthy
that in Jehovah's strength,
not one of you, not one of you missed a day of class.
That is to your credit,
you wanted to learn every day
you took advantage of every opportunity.
Thank you for the zeal that you showed.
So yes, remember the lessons from class,
we know you will,
but also remember the lesson from your journey.
As you take on new assignments in the future,
see past the challenges along the way,
see past the disappointments, see past the tears,
turn your bake a valley into a spring
and you will become stronger for it.
And you can do this through prayer.
You can do this by praying for Jehovah,
praying to Jehovah for his spirit
and focusing on him.
And remember, the end goal
is not the assignment in itself.
The assignment is just a means to experience your real goal
of having and maintaining Jehovah's blessing.
If you prayerfully keep that in focus,
Jehovah will completely change your outlook
regarding the challenges in front of you.
The parched land becomes streams of water,
the tears of pain become tears of joy.
You will see Jehovah make you walk on from strength to strength,
from the initial strength Jehovah gives
to becoming an ever stronger servant of his.
He will empower you,
not only to walk through the valley of hardships,
but you will be that much ready
for whatever work lies ahead.
You will be in a much better position
to appear before Jehovah,
your God, and enjoy his favor.
So in conclusion,
take the bake a valley route
through all your challenges.
There's a wise saying,
a calm sea never made a good sailor.
Likewise, don't trade hardships for comfort
because you will feel a closeness to your Heavenly Father
in a way that you never would have experienced
if you hadn't walked from strength to strength
through the valley of Baker.
That was so encouraging.
Soon, parched two and three
of the Gilead Graduation
will be available on JW.org.
We know that you're eager
to see the presentation in its entirety.
To conclude,
let's visit Ireland.
The land is known as the emerald isle
for its variety of lush,
green landscapes.
It stretches from the cliffs of Moher
to the gentle valleys of Heli's pass,
to the moor mountains in the north.
The white wool of sheep spot
these grassy hills and valleys.
But it was a different kind of sheep
that brought CT Russell in 1891.
It was the first stop in his tour of Europe.
He traveled here some seven times
over a period of 20 years
and was often met by large crowds.
Today, people are still seeking truth in Ireland.
They desire to serve Jehovah
with their whole heart
and find a way to symbolize their dedication
in line with COVID-19 guidelines.
Our brothers and sisters make efforts
to reach everyone with the good news,
including those who speak the traditional Irish language.
Out of the millions here,
a relatively small percentage speak Irish
as their native tongue.
They're usually found in close-knit communities
that value traditional culture.
Despite the challenges,
local publishers find success preaching.
This includes our brothers and sisters
in the Castlebar Irish pregroup,
who were excited to have a share
in the global campaign in November 2020.
Adding to the excitement,
the campaign featured the very first
Irish language watchtower.
Since young ones are required to learn Irish in school,
they are eager to apply the language skills
in the ministry.
Their enthusiasm spurs others on.
The brothers and sisters
in the Castlebar Irish pregroup
send their love and greetings
to the worldwide brotherhood.
From the world headquarters
of Jehovah's Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.